Well, this was a big one, wasn't it?
This was a big decision. From the New
York Times, I'm Rachel Abrams and this
is the Daily. This morning, the Supreme
Court has delivered a monumental victory
for the Constitution, the separation of
powers, and the rule of law. In a major
ruling on Friday, the Supreme Court
limited the ability of judges to block
President Trump's policies nationwide,
including his order to end birthright
citizenship. I'm grateful to the Supreme
Court for stepping in and solving this
very, very big and complex problem, and
they've made it very simple. The ruling
was immediately cheered by the
president. It is a big blow to our
ability to enforce our rights. be while
critics have decrieded it as a
fundamental threat to the rule of law.
But this is just chaos that they've
unleashed in the judicial system for no
reason at all. That kind of ruling
establishes not just an imperial
executive, but an imperial Supreme
Court. Today, my colleague Adam Liptac
explains how the ruling redefineses the
role of the courts at a moment when the
White House is aggressively testing the
limits of its power.
It's Monday, June 30th.
[Music]
Adam, we're talking to you just a couple
days after the ruling by the Supreme
Court in this Birthright Citizenship
case. And the ruling has pretty big
implications, not just for the case, but
really for the role of the courts and
also for a presidency that has been
testing the limits of its power and of
the law since President Trump took
office back in January.
Yeah, the decision has a lot of moving
pieces, Rachel, and as you say, it's
nominally about birthright citizenship,
but really it's about the power of the
courts to check the president.
And the court gave President Trump a big
victory. It severely limited the ability
of lower court judges to stop him from
pursuing his ambitious agenda. Can you
just remind us what are the basics of
the case and how did the court arrive at
the decision that it did?
So on assuming office, President Trump
issued an executive order purporting to
put an end to birthright citizenship, a
fundamental constitutional value in the
14th Amendment that says if you're born
in the United States, you're a United
States citizen. And that's, you know, a
very bold thing. It was promptly
challenged. And three different federal
judges in Maryland, in Massachusetts, in
Washington state issued preliminary
injunctions blocking the executive
order. and the case makes its way to the
Supreme Court. The lawyer for the Trump
administration does something odd. He
says, "I'm not challenging in the
Supreme Court the constitutionality or
not of birthright citizenship, but I
think these lower court judges did
something wrong. They issued what people
called nationwide injunctions, sometimes
called universal injunctions." And just
remind people what that means exactly. A
universal injunction goes beyond the
parties to the case. It says, "I'm a
judge. I rule in your favor. And because
you're right that this government policy
is unconstitutional,
I'm going to give relief not only to
you, but to everybody else affected by
the policy." And that is a fairly recent
development that there should be such
broad injunctions.
Let's remember, Rachel, this is not the
only executive order that courts have
found unlawful. There have been more
than 25 universally injunctions on the
president's efforts to shut down
agencies, to cut funding, to fire
federal workers, to bar transgender
service members, to deport hundreds of
thousands of people. This is a major
major clash
between this administration
and lots and lots of federal trial court
judges. And as you said, the White House
came to the Supreme Court not asking
them to rule on whether the executive
order on birthright citizenship was
constitutional, which I suspect they
think they don't really have a good shot
of prevailing at anyway. Instead, the
government is coming to the Supreme
Court with the intent of going after
these nationwide injunctions.
Yeah. The consensus view of legal
experts is that the administration's
arguments on birthright citizenship as
such are quite weak. So they thought,
"What the hell? We will do what many
other cases have done. Ask the court to
decide whether nationwide injunctions
are proper." No presidents like
nationwide injunctions. The Biden
administration didn't like them. The
Trump administration didn't like them.
And this was, I don't know, the third,
the fourth time they've asked the court
to hear the issue. And it was a surprise
when they did because it doesn't seem
like the perfect vehicle to decide the
question. This case has a lot of
complications
and yet the court nevertheless issued
this major ruling giving President Trump
and other presidents a lot of power to
do stuff unchecked by the lower courts.
And so basically this ruling makes it so
that all those other cases you just
mentioned where judges issued universal
injunctions that apply to the whole
country. All of that could be moot. The
Supreme Court is basically taking a huge
power away from the lower courts. That's
right. Adam, I want to understand the
ruling a little bit more and
specifically, can you help us understand
the majority's legal reasoning here? How
did they explain why these nationwide
injunctions were so problematic? The
majority opinion is written by Justice
Amy Coney Barrett. It's the biggest
decision of her career. It's quite a
surprising assignment for such a junior
justice to get. She writes for the six
justice conservative majority. All of
the Republican appointees. all three of
the Democratic appointees are in descent
and her argument is kind of a classic
originalist take on the question. She
says that when Congress passed the
Judiciary Act of 1789, it gave courts
some powers, but it didn't give them
this power. and it looked back at
English law and basically it was what
conservatives often go to which is
tradition and history and less what's
the better way to address an executive
who is claiming huge powers. So let me
read you a couple snippets from the
decision please. Justice Barrett writes,
"Universal injunctions were not a
feature of federal court litigation
until sometime in the 20th century." She
goes on to say, "They remained rare
until the turn of the 21st century, and
that one study has identified
approximately 127 universal injunctions
between 1963
and 2023.
But 96 of those over 3/4 were issued
during the administrations of George W.
Bush, Barack Obama, President Trump and
President Biden. So she makes the case
that this is a recent concoction and
therefore under originalist thinking
quite suspect. So focusing on history,
she says the bottom line, question mark,
the universal injunction was
conspicuously non-existent for most of
our nation's history. Had federal courts
believed themselves to possess the tool,
surely they would not have let it lay
idle. So basically, Justice Barrett is
saying, "Look, I've looked into the
history of what our system from the
start envisioned as the power of the
federal courts, and it is not a system
in which a single district judge can
block the actions of the president for
everybody in the country." Like, that's
just way too sweeping a power to give
one particular judge. Right? So, she's
arguing that the two dozen or so
universal injunctions
issued since Trump took office for the
second time are a vast overreach by
federal judges who are claiming a power
they do not possess. Does she have a
point here? I mean, what you've just
outlined does make some sense to me on
paper.
Yes. Lots of people think there are good
reasons to be wary of universal
injunctions. Another way to think about
it is someone should decide whether
these programs are lawful, but maybe
that should be the Supreme Court and not
a judge who may have been cherrypicked
by litigants. On the other side of the
balance is we have a president here who
is issuing a really aggressive set of
initiatives
that will upend the way the nation works
and that many people would say needs a
prompt judicial reaction and needs to be
paused while cases go forward otherwise
the executive orders could be
irreversible. The idea here being in
other words that this president as we've
mentioned has been testing the
boundaries of the law so frequently and
in so many ways that you need the tool
of universal injunctions. Right? And
remember too these are provisional
rulings. These just freeze the status
quo while the case goes ahead and the
merits will be decided eventually. And
the question is, if Donald Trump wakes
up one morning and issues an executive
order, does that like presumptively stay
in place for a couple of years while the
case wends its way through the courts?
Or can a federal judge have an early
look and say, you know what, I don't
think this is lawful and I'm going to
give it due consideration, but in the
meantime, I'm going to freeze the status
quo. Well, that's what I have a question
about because let's say he does issue an
executive order. If this tool of
universal injunctions is not available,
what if anything does Barrett and the
rest of the majority say could take its
place during the whole process of
figuring out whether something is legal?
Justice Barrett did say there were a few
alternative routes to get to something
like the same place. And the main one
she focused on was class actions. A
class action is a kind of case where a
few named plaintiffs represent a whole
class of people and if they win all of
those people get the benefits of the
court's ruling and that kind of approach
nobody disputes
is lawful. Now class actions are
cumbersome. The Supreme Court has been
trying to cut back on them, but that is
the primary vehicle that Justice Barrett
suggests could be an alternative to
universal injunctions. So, what does
this ruling mean altogether for the
executive order to end birthright
citizenship?
Well, there's an interesting wrinkle.
The court says its ruling will not go
into effect for 30 days. And that means
that challengers are going to scramble
on at least a couple different levels.
We've already had two class actions
filed on Friday, the same day the
decision came down. There's a decent
chance that one or more courts again
shut the thing down across the nation.
But if that doesn't happen, we're going
to end up in a weird curious world. 22
states challenged the birthright
citizenship order and they won. And
those victories remain in place.
So if at the end of 30 days we don't
have any movement, we'll have a
patchwork with 20 plus states having a
system where children born there are
citizens and in the rest of the country
not. Okay. But just to be clear, this
whole issue of the patchwork system
could be totally moot in the short term
and in the long term, right? Because
theoretically some case could wind its
way up to the Supreme Court that is
directly about birthright citizenship
and whether it is constitutional. And as
you've said, it seems likely that the
Supreme Court would rule in favor of
keeping birthright citizenship and
against the president's executive order.
So in that instance, this whole
birthright citizenship issue that just
gets put to rest. Everything reverts to
the way it was, you know, for 160 years.
However, the issue of overturning
nationwide injunctions would remain. And
that brings us back to the point at the
beginning of the conversation that this
case is about something much bigger than
just whether you are a citizen if you
were born here. Do I have that right?
Right. I mean, this case arises against
the backdrop of a president who is
pushing the most aggressive program in
living memory, perhaps in American
history, testing the boundaries of the
law. And the three dissenting justices
wrote scathing dissents in which they
said the majority had taken a profound
wrong turn in formal historical analysis
at the expense of the reality of
withdrawing the main tool that judges
have used to keep this very aggressive
administration in check.
I've heard a lot of dissents in my day
and these dissents from the three
democratic appointees were really harsh
and really thought that democracy was in
peril.
We'll be right back.
Adam, as you mentioned earlier, the
ruling was 63 with the court's three
liberal justices dissenting pretty
ferociously actually. Can you explain
the response and why it was as strong as
it was? Well, the main descent was
written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor
joined by justices Elena Kagan and
Katanji Brown Jackson. And Justice Sodto
did something that the justices very
seldom do. She read major portions of
her descent from the bench, which is a
sign of profound disagreement. She
thought the court had gone badly astray.
Let me just give you a taste of her
opinion, Rachel. She says, "No right is
safe in the new legal regime the court
creates." Today, the threat is to
birthright citizenship. Tomorrow, a
different administration may try to
seize firearms from law- abiding
citizens or prevent people of certain
faiths from gathering to worship. The
majority holds that absent cumbersome
class action litigation, courts cannot
enjoin even such plainly unlawful
policies. So she sees a very broad
threat to all kinds of freedoms and not
only freedoms that conservatives like or
liberals like but to the very texture
and nature of the American experience.
So Soayor clearly not satisfied with the
alternatives including class actions
that Barrett and the conservative
justices have suggested here and she
also sees this as setting up a terrible
precedent that could be taken advantage
of by future administrations.
That's right. But Justice Stomayor is
meeting Justice Barrett on the legal
arguments.
A separate disscent, maybe an even
hotter disscent, comes from Justice
Katanji Brown Jackson, writing only for
herself. And she says the majority's
decision lets the executive branch
violate the Constitution with respect to
anyone who hasn't sued, anyone who's not
a party. and she says that's quote an
existential threat to the rule of law.
Justice Jackson makes the point that the
majority creates kind of a two-tiered
system. There are people with money and
lawyers and the wherewithal to go to
court and get relief, but a lot of
people don't have that. And she says
that's a real flaw in the court's
reasoning as well. So, it sounds like
Jackson is basically saying we're in a
new legal world here with this ruling.
Lots of Americans will have their rights
violated by the president. And the only
way that they can fight it is if they
sue the government, which most people
just do not have the time or the
resources to do, and they're going to be
forced to do that because these
injunctions are no longer here to
protect us against executive branch
overreach. And so effectively with this
ruling, all of a sudden, all of us here
in the United States would have to
become legal combatants essentially to
protect basic rights enshrined in the
Constitution. Yeah, I mean her language
is just this side of apocalyptic.
She says the majority's complicity in
the creation of a culture of disdain for
lower courts, their rulings, and the law
will surely hasten the downfall of our
governing institutions, enabling our
collective demise. So clearly she's not
mincing her words. Indeed, and Justice
Barrett did not appreciate that
commentary. And here we saw really a
quite unusual thing where the two most
junior members of the court were really
going at each other and in tones that
were quite remarkable. Barrett writing
for the majority says we will not dwell
on Justice Jackson's argument which is
at odds with more than two centuries
worth of precedent not to mention the
Constitution itself. We observe only
this. Justice Jackson decries an
imperial executive while embracing an
imperial judiciary. Wow. Can you just
translate that for us, Adam? Yeah.
Barrett is saying that the majority
ruling is is modest. It wants to stop
judges from being activist. It wants to
keep everyone in their own lanes. And
according to her, Justice Jackson wants
judges to decide everything, even things
that ought to be decided by the elected
branches. Like she's basically saying
Justice Jackson doesn't want an
imperious president, but she's perfectly
happy with judges overreaching. That's
her view, but they're operating on two
different levels. One side is saying,
and you can find this persuasive or not,
but Justice Barrett is saying, you look
at the legal materials, you look at
history, you look at tradition, you look
at the governing statute, and you come
to a conclusion. And Justice Jackson is
saying the conclusion you have led us to
is one in which the president of the
United States can largely do whatever he
wants. Basically, you guys are minding
the details, but you're ignoring the
practical realities of your decision.
Right? But Justice Barrett feels that
the upshot of Justice Jackson's dissent
is actually to give too much power to
the federal courts. And Barrett quotes
Justice Jackson's own words against her.
Barrett says, "Justice Jackson would do
well to heed her own admonition." And
then quoting from Jackson, "Everyone
from the president on down is bound by
law." The suggestion being that the
denters also need to follow the law.
Wow. It really sounds like Barrett is
basically throwing Jackson's words back
in her face. Is it usually this pointed
and personal?
Well, back in the day before Justice
Antinine Scalia died in 2016, he could
write a biting sentence. But even then,
there was an element of playfulness and
humor to it. This seemed quite raw. It
kind of feels like in this back and
forth between Jackson and Barrett that
this is actually fundamentally about the
power of the president versus the power
of the courts and the balance between
the two of them. That's right, Rachel.
Although I would draw a distinction. It
is true that the majority amplifies
executive power, presidential power, the
power of President Trump. And it's true
that the disscent wants federal trial
judges to be able to judge the
lawfulness of Trump programs. But the
place I might draw a slightly different
distinction is I don't think the Supreme
Court is eager to give up any of its own
power. While it doesn't think that lower
court judges get to have the last word
visa v the president, it at least wants
to reserve for itself the right to do
that. But at the same time, this is a
court for the second term in a row on
the last day of the term by a 63 vote
manages to profoundly amplify
presidential power. Last year they ruled
in favor of then presidential candidate
Trump on the question of whether he was
largely immune from prosecution and in
the process sketched out a vision of a
bold and energetic president unchecked
by law in many realms. And this year it
kind of vindicates and even further
amplifies that vision of the presidency
by saying that judges around the country
can't tell the president what to do. And
in both of the cases the majority says
we are talking about the nature of
executive power. It applies to all
presidents. It's not about any
particular president. But at least in
the short term it has profoundly helped
President Trump. Right? It seems not
unreasonable to say that it's difficult
to divorce the two. Given this new
understanding of presidential versus
judicial power if you are President
Trump, what becomes possible now that
this ruling has been issued that perhaps
was not possible before? Well, for
starters, he faces a couple dozen
universal injunctions, and I think he
might well be able to go to court and
get some or all of them dissolved on
issues, just to be clear, like firing
federal workers, defunding federal
agencies that you talked about earlier.
That's right. Adam, do you think that
there's any chance that the government's
goal all along with this birthright
citizenship executive order and the
obvious challenges that were going to
come to it? Do you think that they
intended from the beginning that this
was going to be something that would
ultimately help them not end birthright
citizenship but expand executive power
the way that you have just explained?
Right. Well, whether this was strategic
brilliance or happen stance, what
transpired was that the administration
gained one of its most dearly sought
goals, which is not to let judges block
its initiatives and programs and judge
the lawfulness of the Trump agenda. Now,
the immediate consequence of the court's
ruling might be a lot more litigation
because it may be that a lot of
individuals are going to feel they need
to have to sue because they don't have
the benefit of universal injunctions.
But the big picture is we have a
president who's quite happy with the
Supreme Court.
So we see a kind of close relationship,
a dynamic relationship between the
president and the Supreme Court with the
president claiming unprecedented powers
for himself and the court not only not
standing in his way but generally
opening the door.
[Music]
Adam, thank you for spending part of
your weekend with us. It's good to be
here, Rachel. Thank you.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Sunday, the Senate started debate on
President Trump's domestic policy
package. It's not clear if GOP leaders
have enough support to pass the measure
by their deadline of July 4th. Although
many Republicans hailed the tax cuts and
reductions to Medicaid and other social
programs, Democrats universally assailed
the bill, which a new analysis says
would add at least $3.3 trillion to the
federal deficit over the next 10 years.
And Republican Senator Tom Tillis of
North Carolina says he will not seek
re-election next year. in part because
of his opposition to the bill. His
announcement came a day after President
Trump threatened to back a primary
challenger against him because Tillis
would not fall in line. His departure is
sure to set off a competitive race in
North Carolina that could be pivotal in
the battle for control of the Senate.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Win, Michelle Bonja, and Rob Zipco. It
was edited by Patricia Willins and
Rachel Quester. Contains original music
by Alicia Betup and Marian Lozano and
was engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our
theme music is by Jim Bunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly. Special thanks to
Michael Barbaro.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]